# TurtleKV: High Performance, Dynamically Tuned Key-Value Storage

TurtleKV is a general-purpose, embedded key-value storage engine designed with the goal of being the best choice for the widest possible range of applications and workloads.

Key-Value storage offers an extremely general and powerful interface for durably stored data: the dictionary.  Ideally, one would like to have an implementation of this interface which simultaneously optimizes for updates, queries, and memory usage.  However, theory has proven ([1](https://perso.ens-lyon.fr/loris.marchal/docs-data-aware/papers/paper3.pdf)) and practice as shown ([2](https://stratos.seas.harvard.edu/sites/g/files/omnuum4611/files/stratos/files/rum.pdf)) that this is impossible.  Current state-of-the-art key-value engines, when they offer tuning parameters to dial in the right balance for a given application, usually alter the structure of stored data to trade between updates (writes) and queries (reads): better write performance means worse read performance (and vice versa).  This can be compensated to an extent by page caching and AMQ filters (e.g., Bloom filters), but a fundamental problem with this approach is that _optimized writes in the past increase the cost of future reads for the lifetime of stored data_.

TurtleKV is different.  Instead of using a write- or read-optimized on-disk structure, TurtleKV uses a balanced data structure, the Turtle Tree.  Turtle Trees can be read or write optimized by allocating memory to either page caching (reads) or update/checkpoint buffering (writes) without changing their durable structure.  This means applications can pay to optimize the most important operations _dynamically_, without locking in future costs.

Today, TurtleKV offers excellent performance relative to other state-of-the-art key-value stores.  Because its tuning optimization strategy is based on memory allocation rather than on-disk structure, applications that use it to store data can continue to run faster and more efficiently as TurtleKV is updated and improved, with no requirement to migrate to a new data format.

TurtleKV uses the [Conan package management system](https://conan.io/), and is built on MathWorks' [Low Level File System (LLFS)](https://github.com/mathworks/llfs/) library.
